Heroides1
Ovid
ElegiacCouplet
58

Haec tua Penelope lento tibi mittit, Ulixe
	nil mihi rescribas tu tamen: ipse veni!
Your Penelope sends these things to you, slow Ulysses,
	write nothing back to me, however: come yourself!

Troia iacet certe, Danais invisa puellis;
	vix Priamus tanti totaque Troia fuit.
Troy lies in ruins, surely, hated by Greek girls:
	Priam was barely of such value and Troy (too) was (barely) of such value.

o utinam tum, cum Lacedaemona classe petebat,
	obrutus insanis esset adulter aquis!
Oh I wish, when he was heading for Sparta with his fleet,
	that adulterer (i.e. Paris) were overwhelmed by the monstrous waters!

non ego deserto iacuissem frigida lecto,
	nec quererer tardos ire relicta dies;
I would not have lain cold in our deserted bed,
	nor would I, having been abandoned, lament that the days were going slowly;

nec mihi quaerenti spatiosam fallere noctem
	lassaret viduas pendula tela manus.
nor would the hanging warp tire out my destitute hands as I’m searching to deceive the long night.
	(see above)

Quando ego non timui graviora pericula veris?
	res est solliciti plena timoris amor.
When have I not feared dangers more serious than reality?
	Love is a thing full of anxious fear.

in te fingebam violentos Troas ituros;
	nomine in Hectoreo pallida semper eram.
I was imagining violent Trojans would go against you;
	I was always pale at Hector’s name.

sive quis Antilochum narrabat ab hoste revictum,
	Antilochus nostri causa timoris erat;
Or if someone was telling me Antilochus was beaten back by an enemy,
	Antilochus was the cause of my fear;

sive Menoetiaden falsis cecidisse sub armis,
	flebam successu posse carere dolos.
or if (someone was telling me) that Patroclus had fallen, subject to false weapons,
	I would mourn that his tricks were able to fail to achieve success.

sanguine Tlepolemus Lyciam tepefecerat hastam;
	Tlepolemi leto cura novata mea est.
Had Tlepolemus made the Lycian spear warm with his blood;
	my anxiety would be renewed by the death of Tlepolemus.

denique, quisquis erat castris iugulatus Achivis,
	frigidius glacie pectus amantis erat.
Finally, had anyone been killed in the Greeks’ camp,
	the heart of this lover was colder than ice.

Sed bene consuluit casto deus aequus amori.
	versa est in cineres sospite Troia viro.
But a favorable god has taken care of a chaste love.
	Troy was turned into ashes with my husband being the savior.

Argolici rediere duces, altaria fumant;
	ponitur ad patrios barbara praeda deos.
The Greek leaders have returned, the altars are smoking;
	The foreign loot is placed to our fathers’ gods.

grata ferunt nymphae pro salvis dona maritis;
	illi victa suis Troica fata canunt.
Brides bring pleasing gifts for safe husbands;
	They (the husbands) sing of the doom of Troy, conquered by their own (men).

mirantur iustique senes trepidaeque puellae;
	narrantis coniunx pendet ab ore viri.
Both just old men and scared girls marvel;
	a wife hangs on the word of her telling husband.

atque aliquis posita monstrat fera proelia mensa,
	pingit et exiguo Pergama tota mero:
and someone shows wild battles on a set-up table,
	and paints the whole citadels of Troy with a little bit of undiluted wine:

'hac ibat Simois; haec est Sigeia tellus;
	hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis.
“The Simois river was going here; this is Trojan land;
	here the lofty palace of old Priam stood.

illic Aeacides, illic tendebat Ulixes;
	hic lacer admissos terruit Hector equos.'
Achilles pitched his tent there, Ulysses there;
	here mangled Hector spooked the horses put at a gallop.”

Omnia namque tuo senior te quaerere misso
	rettulerat nato Nestor, at ille mihi.
The elder Nestor had reported everything to your son sent to search for you,
	but he (your son) reported (it) to me.

rettulit et ferro Rhesumque Dolonaque caesos,
	utque sit hic somno proditus, ille dolo.
He reported also that Rhesus and Dolon (were) slaughtered by your sword,
	and how he (Rhesus) was betrayed in his sleep, he (Dolon) by deceit.

ausus es—o nimium nimiumque oblite tuorum!—
	Thracia nocturno tangere castra dolo
You dared -- Oh, you, having forgotten your family too much and TOO MUCH! --
	to meddle with the Thracian camp with your nighttime trickery

totque simul mactare viros, adiutus ab uno!
	at bene cautus eras et memor ante mei!
and to slay so many men at the same time, helped by one!
	But you were well cautious and mindful of me then!

usque metu micuere sinus, dum victor amicum
	dictus es Ismariis isse per agmen equis.
My heart trembled in fear constantly, while you, the victor,
	were said to have gone through the friendly line on Thracian horses.

Sed mihi quid prodest vestris disiecta lacertis
	Ilios et, murus quod fuit, esse solum,
But what does a Troy destroyed by your strength benefit me
	and, the wall that was to be dirt,

si maneo, qualis Troia durante manebam,
	virque mihi dempto fine carendus abest?
if I remain, like I was remaining with Troy lasting,
	and my husband to be missed by me, with an end taken away?

diruta sunt aliis, uni mihi Pergama restant,
	incola captivo quae bove victor arat.
Troy has been destroyed for others, Troy still stands for me alone,
	Which the inhabitant, the victor, plows with a captive ox.

iam seges est, ubi Troia fuit, resecandaque falce
	luxuriat Phrygio sanguine pinguis humus;
Where Troy was, now crops are, and earth full of Trojan blood to be cut with a scythe
	is abundant in growth;

semisepulta virum curvis feriuntur aratris
	ossa, ruinosas occulit herba domos.
Half-buried bones of men are struck by curved plows,
	vegetation covers ruinous homes.

victor abes, nec scire mihi, quae causa morandi,
	aut in quo lateas ferreus orbe, licet!
You, the victor, are away, and it is not permitted for me to know what (is) cause of your delay,
	in what land you, iron-hearted one, are lying hidden!

Quisquis ad haec vertit peregrinam litora puppim,
	ille mihi de te multa rogatus abit,
Whoever turns his foreign ship to these shores,
	he goes away from me, having been asked a lot about you,

quamque tibi reddat, si te modo viderit usquam,
	traditur huic digitis charta notata meis.
and if he has seen you recently anywhere,
	a paper written by my fingers is handed to him to return to you.

nos Pylon, antiqui Neleia Nestoris arva,
	misimus; incerta est fama remissa Pylo.
We sent to Pylos, the Nelean land of ancient Nestor;
	the story sent back from Pylos is uncertain.

misimus et Sparten; Sparte quoque nescia veri.
	quas habitas terras, aut ubi lentus abes?
and we sent to Sparta; Sparta also (was) ignorant of the truth.
	What lands do you inhabit, or where are you away, slow (to return)?

utilius starent etiamnunc moenia Phoebi—
	irascor votis, heu, levis ipsa meis!
(I used to wish) the walls of Phoebus even now  were standing more usefully--
	I myself, fickle, am angry at my vows oh dear!

scirem ubi pugnares, et tantum bella timerem,
	et mea cum multis iuncta querela foret.
(If the Trojan war were still happening) I’d know where you were fighting, and I’d fear only battles,
	and my complaining would be joined with many.

quid timeam, ignoro—timeo tamen omnia demens,
	et patet in curas area lata meas.
I don’t know what I should fear -- nevertheless I, out of my mind, fear everything,
	a wide area lies open to my anxieties.

quaecumque aequor habet, quaecumque pericula tellus,
	tam longae causas suspicor esse morae.
I suspect whatever dangers the sea holds, whatever danger the land holds
	are the causes of your so long delay.

haec ego dum stulte metuo, quae vestra libido est,
	esse peregrino captus amore potes.
While I fear these things, you, fool, can be
	captured by a foreign love, which desire is yours.

forsitan et narres, quam sit tibi rustica coniunx,
	quae tantum lanas non sinat esse rudes.
And perhaps you would tell how you had a country wife,
	of the sort who allows her wool not to be rough.

fallar, et hoc crimen tenues vanescat in auras,
	neve, revertendi liber, abesse velis!
(I wish) I was deceived, and this accusation vanished onto the light breezes,
	and you, free to return, would not want to be away!

Me pater Icarius viduo discedere lecto
	cogit et immensas increpat usque moras.
My father Icarius urges me to leave my spouseless bed
	and chides continually my huge delays.

increpet usque licet—tua sum, tua dicar oportet;
	Penelope coniunx semper Ulixis ero.
Although he chides me continually -- I am yours, it’s proper that I am called yours;
	I, Penelope, will always be the wife of Ulysses.

ille tamen pietate mea precibusque pudicis
	frangitur et vires temperat ipse suas.
He however is softened by my piety and chaste prayers
	and he himself tempers his forcefulness.

Dulichii Samiique et quos tulit alta Zacynthos,
	turba ruunt in me luxuriosa proci,
The suitors, the Dulichii and Samii and (those) whom lofty Zacynthus brought,
	a wanton crowd, rush at me,

inque tua regnant nullis prohibentibus aula;
	viscera nostra, tuae dilacerantur opes.
they are ruling in your palace, with no people preventing them;
	my heart, your wealth are torn to pieces.

quid tibi Pisandrum Polybumque Medontaque dirum
	Eurymachique avidas Antinoique manus
Why would I mention Pisandrus and Polybus and harsh Medon
	and Eurymachus and the eager hands of Antinous

atque alios referam, quos omnis turpiter absens
	ipse tuo partis sanguine rebus alis?
and others to you, whom you yourself support scandalously with your blood, being away,
	with all your things having been acquired?

Irus egens pecorisque Melanthius actor edendi
	ultimus accedunt in tua damna pudor.
Destitute Irus and Melanthius, the shepherd of the flock to be eaten
	the most extreme shame,  are added to your losses.

Tres sumus inbelles numero, sine viribus uxor
	Laertesque senex Telemachusque puer.
We, unwarlike, are three in number, a wife without strength,
	and the old man, Laertes, and the boy, Telemachus.

ille per insidias paene est mihi nuper ademptus,
	dum parat invitis omnibus ire Pylon.
He nearly was taken away from me recently through an ambush
	while he was preparing to go to Pylos, with everyone unwilling.

di, precor, hoc iubeant, ut euntibus ordine fatis
	ille meos oculos conprimat, ille tuos!
May the gods order this, I pray, that, with our deaths going in order,
	he close my eyes, he yours!

hac faciunt custosque boum longaevaque nutrix,
	tertius inmundae cura fidelis harae;
Both the guard of the cattle and the aged nurse are on our side,
	(and) a third, the faithful caretaker of our dirty pigsties;

sed neque Laertes, ut qui sit inutilis armis,
	hostibus in mediis regna tenere potest—
but, as he who is useless with weapons,
	Laertes is not able to hold the kingdom in the midst of enemies --

Telemacho veniet, vivat modo, fortior aetas;
	nunc erat auxiliis illa tuenda patris—
a stronger age will arrive for Telemachus, may he just live;
	that had to be protected by his father’s help now--

nec mihi sunt vires inimicos pellere tectis.
	tu citius venias, portus et ara tuis!
I don’t have the strength to drive out enemies from our home.
	May you, the harbor and altar for your family, come faster!

est tibi sitque, precor, natus, qui mollibus annis
	in patrias artes erudiendus erat.
You have, and, I pray, may you have, a son who must be educated
	in his father’s arts in his tender years.

respice Laerten; ut tu sua lumina condas,
	extremum fati sustinet ille diem.
Consider Laertes; so that you may close his eyes,
	he holds up (restrains) the final day of his fate.

Certe ego, quae fueram te discedente puella,
	protinus ut venias, facta videbor anus.
Certainly I, who had been a girl when you were departing,
	the instant that you come, I will seem to have become an old woman.

