Elegies2.19
Propertius
ElegiacCouplet
16

Etsi me invito discedis, Cynthia, Roma,
	laetor quod sine me devia rura coles.
Although you are leaving from Rome against my will, Cynthia,
	I am happy because you will be living in the secluded country without me.

nullus erit castis iuvenis corruptor in agris,
	qui te blanditiis non sinat esse probam;
There will be no young seducer on the virtuous farms,
	who, with his charms, would not allow you to be good;

nulla neque ante tuas orietur rixa fenestras,
	nec tibi clamatae somnus amarus erit.
and not any quarrel will arise before your windows,
	nor will there be bitter sleep for you, having been shouted for.

sola eris et solos spectabis, Cynthia, montis
	et pecus et finis pauperis agricolae.
You will be alone and will look at lonely mountains
	and a flock and the lands of a poor farmer.

illic te nulli poterunt corrumpere ludi,
	fanaque peccatis plurima causa tuis.
There no games will be able to spoil you,
	very many temples (will not be) the cause of your sins.

illic assidue tauros spectabis arantis,
	et vitem docta ponere falce comas;
There you will see bulls plowing constantly,
	and the vine put down its hairs by the learned sickle;

atque ibi rara feres inculto tura sacello,
	haedus ubi agrestis corruet ante focos;
and there you will offer rare frankincense to an overgrown shrine,
	where a young goat will collapse before the wild altars;

protinus et nuda choreas imitabere sura;
	omnia ab externo sint modo tuta viro.
immediately you will imitate dancers with bare calf;
	just may everything be safe from a strange man.

ipse ego venabor: iam nunc me sacra Dianae
	suscipere et Veneris ponere vota iuvat.
I myself will hunt: now it pleases me to undertake the sacred rites of Diana
	and put aside my vows to Venus.

incipiam captare feras et reddere pinu
	cornua et audaces ipse monere canis;
I will begin to hunt wild beasts and give horns on a pine tree
	and advise bold dogs myself;

non tamen ut vastos ausim temptare leones
	aut celer agrestis comminus ire sues.
May I not however try huge lions
	or go swiftly hand-to-hand against savage pigs.

haec igitur mihi sit lepores audacia mollis
	excipere et structo figere avem calamo,
Therefore let there be courage for me to draw out soft rabbits
	and pierce a bird with jointed reed

qua formosa suo Clitumnus flumina luco
	integit, et niveos abluit unda boves.
where the Clitumnus river covers its beautiful streams with its sacred grove,
	and its wave washes the snowy-white oxen.

tu quotiens aliquid conabere, vita, memento
	venturum paucis me tibi Luciferis.
As often as you will try something, my life, remember
	that I will come for you within a few days.

hic me nec solae poterunt avertere silvae,
	nec vaga muscosis flumina fusa iugis,
And the lonely woods will not be able to disturb me here,
	nor (will the) wandering streams poured out on mossy ridges,

quin ego in assidua mutem tua nomina lingua:
	absenti nemo non nocuisse velit.
I shall change your names in constant speech:
	no one would not want to have harmed someone absent. (i.e. everyone would want to hurt the absent one)