Elegies1.1
Propertius
ElegiacCouplet
19

Cynthia prima suis miserum me cepit ocellis,
	contactum nullis ante cupidinibus.
Cynthia first caught lovesick me with her eyes,
	me having been touched by no desires before.

tum mihi constantis deiecit lumina fastus
	et caput impositis pressit Amor pedibus,
then Cupid knocked down my eyes of constant disdain
	and pressed my head, with his feet put upon me,

donec me docuit castas odisse puellas
	improbus, et nullo vivere consilio.
until he taught me to hate moral girls,
	wicked (Cupid), and to live with no sense.

ei mihi, iam toto furor hic non deficit anno,
	cum tamen adversos cogor habere deos.
Woe to me, this madness has not ceased now in an entire year,
	when I am nevertheless forced to consider the gods hostile.

Milanion nullos fugiendo, Tulle, labores
	saevitiam durae contudit Iasidos.                      	
Milanion crushed the savagery of the harsh daughter of Iasius
	not by fleeing troubles, Tullus.

nam modo Partheniis amens errabat in antris,
	rursus in hirsutas ibat et ille feras;
For, out of his mind, Melanion was wandering in the valleys of Mount Parthenius sometimes,
	in turn he was going also against hairy beasts;

ille etiam Hylaei percussus vulnere rami
	saucius Arcadiis rupibus ingemuit.
he, too, having been struck by the pain of Hylaeus’ (the centaur’s) branch,
	wounded, groaned in the Arcadian rocks.

ergo velocem potuit domuisse puellam:
	tantum in amore fides et benefacta valent.
Therefore he was able to have tamed the speedy girl:
	loyalty and service prevail so much in love.

in me tardus Amor non ullas cogitat artes,
	nec meminit notas, ut prius, ire vias.
In my case, slow Cupid does not imagine any tricks,
	and does not remember the marked routes he went on, as before.

at vos, deductae quibus est pellacia lunae
	et labor in magicis sacra piare focis,
But y’all, to whom the trickery of a drawn-down moon belongs,
	and the effort to perform sacred rites at magical altars,

en agedum dominae mentem convertite nostrae,
	et facite illa meo palleat ore magis!
Come, come on, convert the mind of my mistress,
	and make it that she pale more than my face!

tunc ego crediderim Manes et sidera vobis
	posse Cytinaeis ducere carminibus.
Then I would believe you are able to command the shades and stars
	with your Colchian incantations.

aut vos, qui sero lapsum revocatis, amici,
	quaerite non sani pectoris auxilia.
Or you, friends who call me (too) late, having (already) fallen (in love)
	obtain assistance for my not healthy heart.

fortiter et ferrum saevos patiemur et ignes,
	sit modo libertas quae velit ira loqui.
I will suffer bravely both iron and savage fires,
	just let there be freedom to speak what my anger would like.

ferte per extremas gentes et ferte per undas,
	qua non ulla meum femina norit iter.
Carry me through foreign people and carry me through waves,
	where not any woman would find out about my journey.

vos remanete, quibus facili deus annuit aure,
	sitis et in tuto semper amore pares.
Stay, you to whom the god has nodded assent with favorable ear,
	may you be always equal in a safe love.

in me nostra Venus noctes exercet amaras,
	et nullo vacuus tempore defit Amor.
My Venus exercises harsh nights against me,
	and at no time is empty Love in short supply.

hoc, moneo, vitate malum: sua quemque moretur
	cura, neque assueto mutet amore locum.
I warn you, avoid this evil: let his own cares delay each man,
	and let him not change his place when love is a habit.

quod si quis monitis tardas adverterit aures,
	heu referet quanto verba dolore mea!
If anyone will have turned his slow ears toward my warnings,
	alas, let him report my words with such great grief!