Etsi me invito discedis, Cynthia, Roma,
 Although you are leaving from Rome against my will, Cynthia,
    laetor quod sine me devia rura coles.
 I am happy because you will be living in the secluded country without me.
nullus erit castis iuvenis corruptor in agris,
 There will be no young seducer on the virtuous farms,
    qui te blanditiis non sinat esse probam;
 who, with his charms, would not allow you to be good;
nulla neque ante tuas orietur rixa fenestras,
 and not any quarrel will arise before your windows,
    nec tibi clamatae somnus amarus erit.
 nor will there be bitter sleep for you, having been shouted for.
sola eris et solos spectabis, Cynthia, montis
 You will be alone and will look at lonely mountains
    et pecus et finis pauperis agricolae.
 and a flock and the lands of a poor farmer.
illic te nulli poterunt corrumpere ludi,
 There no games will be able to spoil you,
    fanaque peccatis plurima causa tuis.
 very many temples (will not be) the cause of your sins.
illic assidue tauros spectabis arantis,
 There you will see bulls plowing constantly,
    et vitem docta ponere falce comas;
 and the vine put down its hairs by the learned sickle;
atque ibi rara feres inculto tura sacello,
 and there you will offer rare frankincense to an overgrown shrine,
    haedus ubi agrestis corruet ante focos;
 where a young goat will collapse before the wild altars;
protinus et nuda choreas imitabere sura;
 immediately you will imitate dancers with bare calf;
    omnia ab externo sint modo tuta viro.
 just may everything be safe from a strange man.
ipse ego venabor: iam nunc me sacra Dianae
 I myself will hunt: now it pleases me to undertake the sacred rites of Diana
    suscipere et Veneris ponere vota iuvat.
and put aside my vows to Venus.
incipiam captare feras et reddere pinu
 I will begin to hunt wild beasts and give horns on a pine tree
    cornua et audaces ipse monere canis;
 and advise bold dogs myself;
non tamen ut vastos ausim temptare leones
May I not however try huge lions
    aut celer agrestis comminus ire sues.
or go swiftly hand-to-hand against savage pigs.
haec igitur mihi sit lepores audacia mollis
 Therefore let there be courage for me to draw out soft rabbits
    excipere et structo figere avem calamo,
 and pierce a bird with jointed reed
qua formosa suo Clitumnus flumina luco
 where the Clitumnus river covers its beautiful streams with its sacred grove,
    integit, et niveos abluit unda boves.
 and its wave washes the snowy-white oxen.
tu quotiens aliquid conabere, vita, memento 
 As often as you will try something, my life, remember
    venturum paucis me tibi Luciferis.
 that I will come for you within a few days.
hic me nec solae poterunt avertere silvae,
 And the lonely woods will not be able to disturb me here,
    nec vaga muscosis flumina fusa iugis,
nor (will the) wandering streams poured out on mossy ridges,
quin ego in assidua mutem tua nomina lingua:
 I shall change your names in constant speech:
    absenti nemo non nocuisse velit.
no one would not want to have harmed someone absent. (i.e. everyone would want to hurt the absent one)
