Cynthia prima suis miserum me cepit ocellis,
Cynthia first caught lovesick me with her eyes,
contactum nullis ante cupidinibus.
me having been touched by no desires before.
tum mihi constantis deiecit lumina fastus
then Cupid knocked down my eyes of constant disdain
et caput impositis pressit Amor pedibus,
and pressed my head, with his feet put upon me,
donec me docuit castas odisse puellas                                                               
until he taught me to hate moral girls,
improbus, et nullo vivere consilio.
wicked (Cupid), and to live with no sense.
ei mihi, iam toto furor hic non deficit anno,
Woe to me, this madness has not ceased now in an entire year,
cum tamen adversos cogor habere deos.
when I am nevertheless forced to consider the gods hostile.
Milanion nullos fugiendo, Tulle, labores
 Milanion crushed the savagery of the harsh daughter of Iasius 
saevitiam durae contudit Iasidos.                      	                           
 not by fleeing troubles, Tullus.
nam modo Partheniis amens errabat in antris,
 For, out of his mind, Melanion was wandering in the valleys of Mount Parthenius sometimes,
rursus in hirsutas ibat et ille feras;
 in turn he was going also against hairy beasts;
ille etiam Hylaei percussus vulnere rami
 he, too, having been struck by the pain of Hylaeus’ (the centaur’s) branch, 
saucius Arcadiis rupibus ingemuit.
wounded, groaned in the Arcadian rocks.
ergo velocem potuit domuisse puellam: 
 Therefore he was able to have tamed the speedy girl:
tantum in amore fides et benefacta valent.
 loyalty and service prevail so much in love.
in me tardus Amor non ullas cogitat artes,
 In my case, slow Cupid does not imagine any tricks,
nec meminit notas, ut prius, ire vias.
and does not remember the marked routes he went on, as before.
at vos, deductae quibus est pellacia lunae
 But y’all, to whom the trickery of a drawn-down moon belongs,
et labor in magicis sacra piare focis,                                               
 and the effort to perform sacred rites at magical altars,
en agedum dominae mentem convertite nostrae,
Come, come on, convert the mind of my mistress,
et facite illa meo palleat ore magis!
 and make it that she pale more than my face!
tunc ego crediderim Manes et sidera vobis
 Then I would believe you are able to command the shades and stars
posse Cytinaeis ducere carminibus.
with your Colchian incantations.
aut vos, qui sero lapsum revocatis, amici,                                              
 Or you, friends who call me (too) late, having (already) fallen (in love)
quaerite non sani pectoris auxilia.
 obtain assistance for my not healthy heart.
fortiter et ferrum saevos patiemur et ignes,
 I will suffer bravely both iron and savage fires,
sit modo libertas quae velit ira loqui.
just let there be freedom to speak what my anger would like.
ferte per extremas gentes et ferte per undas,
 Carry me through foreign people and carry me through waves,
qua non ulla meum femina norit iter.                                                     
where not any woman would find out about my journey.
vos remanete, quibus facili deus annuit aure,
 Stay, you to whom the god has nodded assent with favorable ear,
sitis et in tuto semper amore pares.
 may you be always equal in a safe love.
in me nostra Venus noctes exercet amaras,
 My Venus exercises harsh nights against me,
et nullo vacuus tempore defit Amor.
 and at no time is empty Love in short supply.
hoc, moneo, vitate malum: sua quemque moretur                                       
 I warn you, avoid this evil: let his own cares delay each man,
cura, neque assueto mutet amore locum.
and let him not change his place when love is a habit.
quod si quis monitis tardas adverterit aures,
 If anyone will have turned his slow ears toward my warnings,
heu referet quanto verba dolore mea!
alas, let him report my words with such great grief!
